sql: elaborate more on optimizer hints (#2573)
pingcap/docs: optimizer-hints.md

## Syntax

> Optimizer hints are specified within `/*+ ... */` comments and follow behind the `SELECT`, `UPDATE` or `DELETE` keyword in a SQL statement (optimizer hints are not supported behind the `INSERT` keyword). The hint names are case insensitive. If you want to use multiple hints, separate them with commas.

Reviewer: The use of 'behind' is ambiguous. It is better to use following:

```suggestion
Optimizer hints are case insensitive and specified within `/*+ ... */` comments following the `SELECT`, `UPDATE` or `DELETE` keyword in a SQL statement. Optimizer hints are not currently supported for `INSERT` statements.
```

> For example, the following query uses three different hints:

Reviewer: It is easier to read this fact by moving it from the previous paragraph to here.
```suggestion
 Multiple hints can be specified by separating with commas. For example, the following query uses three different hints:
```

> select /*+ USE_INDEX(t1, idx1), HASH_AGG(), HASH_JOIN(t1) */ count(*) from t t1, t t2 where t1.a = t2.b;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT /*+ USE_INDEX(t1, idx1), HASH_AGG(), HASH_JOIN(t1) */ count(*) FROM t t1, t t2 WHERE t1.a = t2.b;
```

```

> Optimizer hints can be used along with `Explain`/`Explain Analyze`. These two commands can check whether optimizer hints have taken effect on the queries as expected. If optimizer hints contains syntax errors or are not applicable to the statements, the query is executed without the optimizer hints. It does not report an error on the optimizer hints, but only record a warning. You can view the detailed information after the query is completed by running the `Show Warnings` command.

Reviewer: The first sentence implies somewhat that the purpose of the hint is tied to EXPLAIN / EXPLAIN ANALYZE, when it is not really - the purpose is to change the actual query, EXPLAIN is an observation tool (explained in second sentence). I think someone using hints should understand what EXPLAIN does somewhat, so I've reworded it a little and linked to explain if they don't.

```suggestion
How optimizer hints affect query execution plans can be observed in the output of [`EXPLAIN`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain.md) and [`EXPLAIN ANALYZE`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain-analyze.md).

An incorrect or incomplete hint will not result in a statement error. This is because hints are intended to have only a _hint_ (suggestion) semantic to query execution. Similarly, TiDB will at most return a warning if a hint is not applicable.
```

Reviewer 2: @eurekaka PTAL the comment above.

Reviewer 3: LGTM

> **Note:**
>
> If the comments do not follow behind the specified keywords, they will be treated as common MySQL comments. The comments do not take effect, and no warning is reported.

Currently, TiDB supports two categories of hints, which are different in scope. The first category of hints takes effect in the scope of query blocks, such as [`/*+ HASH_AGG() */`](#hash_agg); the second category of hints takes effect in the whole query, such as [`/*+ MEMORY_QUOTA(1024 MB)*/`](#memory_quotan).

Each query or sub-query in a statement corresponds to a different query block, and each query block has its own name. For example:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql

> select * from (select * from t) t1, (select * from t) t2;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM (SELECT * FROM t) t1, (SELECT * FROM t) t2;
```

```

The above query statement has three query blocks: the outermost `SELECT` corresponds to the first query block, whose name is `sel_1`; the two `SELECT` sub-queries correspond to the second and the third query block, whose names are `sel_2` and `sel_3`, respectively. The sequence of the numbers is based on the appearance of `SELECT` from left to right. If you replace the first `SELECT` with `DELETE` or `UPDATE`, then the corresponding query block names are `del_1` or `upd_1`.

## Hints that take effect in query blocks

This category of hints can follow behind **any** `SELECT`, `UPDATE` or `DELETE` keywords. To control the effect scope of the hint, use the name of the query block in the hint. You can make the hint parameters clear by accurately identifying each table in the query (in case of duplicated table names or aliases). If no query block is specified in the hint, the hint takes effect in the current block by default.

For example:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql

> select /*+ HASH_JOIN(@sel_1 t1@sel_1, t3) */ * from (select t1.a, t1.b from t t1, t t2 where t1.a = t2.a) t1, t t3 where t1.b = t3.b;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT /*+ HASH_JOIN(@sel_1 t1@sel_1, t3) */ * FROM (SELECT t1.a, t1.b FROM t t1, t t2 WHERE t1.a = t2.a) t1, t t3 WHERE t1.b = t3.b;
```

As described above, you can specify the name of the query block in the hint in two ways:

- Set the query block name as the first parameter of the hint, and separate it from other parameters with a space. In addition to `QB_NAME`, all the hints listed in this section also have another optional hidden parameter `@QB_NAME`. By using this parameter, you can specify the effect scope of this hint.
- Append `@QB_NAME` to a table name in the parameter to explicitly specify which query block this table belongs to.

> **Note:**
>
> You must put the hint in or before the query block that it takes effect in. If the hint is put after the query block, it cannot take effect.

### QB_NAME

When the query statement is a complicated statement that includes multiple nested queries, the id and name of a certain query block might be mistaken. Hint `QB_NAME` can help us in this regard.

`QB_NAME` means Query Block Name. You can specify a name name to a query block. The specified `QB_NAME` and the default name are both valid. For example:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql

> select /*+ QB_NAME(QB1) */ * from (select * from t) t1, (select * from t) t2;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT /*+ QB_NAME(QB1) */ * FROM (SELECT * FROM t) t1, (SELECT * FROM t) t2;
```

```

> This hint specifies the `SELECT` query block's name to `QB1`, which makes `QB1` and the default name `sel_1` both valid for the query block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This hint specifies the outer `SELECT` query block's name to `QB1`, which makes `QB1` and the default name `sel_1` both valid for the query block.
```

> **Note:**
>
> `TIDB_INLJ` is the alias for `INL_JOIN` in TiDB 3.0.x and earlier versions. If you are using any of these versions, you must apply the `TIDB_INLJ(t1_name [, tl_name ...])` syntax for the hint. For the later versions of TiDB, `TIDB_INLJ` and `INL_JOIN` are both valid names for the hint, but `INL_JOIN` is recommended.

### INL_HASH_JOIN

> The `INL_HASH_JOIN(t1_name [, tl_name])` hint tells the optimizer to use the index nested loop hash join algorithm. The conditions for using this algorithm are the same with the conditions for using the index nested loop join algorithm. The difference between the two algorithms is that `INL_JOIN` creates a hash table on the connected inner table, but `INL_HASH_JOIN` creates a hash table on the connected outer table. `INL_HASH_JOIN` has a fixed limit for memory usage, while the memory used by `INL_JOIN` depends on the number of rows matched in the inner table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `INL_HASH_JOIN(t1_name [, tl_name])` hint tells the optimizer to use the index nested loop hash join algorithm. The conditions for using this algorithm are the same with the conditions for using the index nested loop join algorithm. The difference between the two algorithms is that `INL_JOIN` creates a hash table on the joined inner table, but `INL_HASH_JOIN` creates a hash table on the joined outer table. `INL_HASH_JOIN` has a fixed limit on memory usage, while the memory used by `INL_JOIN` depends on the number of rows matched in the inner table.
```

### INL_MERGE_JOIN

> The `INL_MERGE_JOIN(t1_name [, tl_name])` hint tells the optimizer to use the index nested loop merge join algorithm. This hint is used in the same scenario as `INL_JOIN`. Compared with `INL_JOIN` and `INL_HASH_JOIN`, it saves more memory but requires more strict usage conditions: the column sets of the inner table in join keys is the prefix of the inner table index, or the index of the inner table is the prefix of the column sets of the inner table in join keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `INL_MERGE_JOIN(t1_name [, tl_name])` hint tells the optimizer to use the index nested loop merge join algorithm. This hint is used in the same scenario as in that of `INL_JOIN`. Compared with `INL_JOIN` and `INL_HASH_JOIN`, it saves more memory but requires more strict usage conditions: the column sets of the inner table in join keys is the prefix of the inner table index, or the index of the inner table is the prefix of the column sets of the inner table in join keys.
```

> select /*+ USE_INDEX(t1, idx1, idx2) */ * from t t1;

Reviewer: I think aliasing t as t1 here is confusing and not required:
```suggestion
SELECT /*+ USE_INDEX(t1, idx1, idx2) */ * FROM t1;
```

> select /*+ USE_INDEX_MERGE(t1, idx_a, idx_b, idx_c) */ * from t t1 where t1.a > 10 or t1.b > 10;

Reviewer: I think aliasing t as t1 here is confusing and not required:
```suggestion
SELECT /*+ USE_INDEX_MERGE(t1, idx_a, idx_b, idx_c) */ * FROM t1 WHERE t1.a > 10 OR t1.b > 10;
```

```

> When multiple `USE_INDEX_MERGE` hint is made to the same table, the optimizer tries to select the index from the union of the index set specified by these hints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When multiple `USE_INDEX_MERGE` hints are made to the same table, the optimizer tries to select the index from the union of the index sets specified by these hints.
```

> **Note:**
>
> The parameters of `USE_INDEX_MERGE` refer to index names, rather than column names. The index name of the primary key is `primary`.

This hint takes effect on strict conditions, including:

- If the query can select a single index scan in addition to full table scan, the optimizer does not select index merge.
- If the query is in an explicit transaction, and if the statements before this query has already written data, the optimizer does not select index merge.

## Hints that take effect in the whole query

> This category of hints can only follow behind the **first** `SELECT`, `UPDATE` or `DELETE` keywords, which is equivalent to modifying the value of the specified system variable when this query is executed. The priority of the hint is higher than that of existing system variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This category of hints can only follow behind the **first** `SELECT`, `UPDATE` or `DELETE` keyword, which is equivalent to modifying the value of the specified system variable when this query is executed. The priority of the hint is higher than that of existing system variables.
```

select /*+ NO_INDEX_MERGE() */ * from t where t.a > 0 or t.b > 0;
```

In addition to this hint, setting the `tidb_enable_index_merge` system variable also controls whether to enable this feature.

> **Note:**
>

> > `NO_INDEX_MERGE` has higher priority than `USE_INDEX_MERGE`. When both hints are used, `USE_INDEX_MERGE` does not take effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> `NO_INDEX_MERGE` has a higher priority over `USE_INDEX_MERGE`. When both hints are used, `USE_INDEX_MERGE` does not take effect.
```
